Each scheme has further variations depending on how one refers to the ground floor and the subterranean levels. The existence of two incompatible conventions is a common source of confusion in international communication, sometimes even between communities who speak the same language.

In all English-speaking countries, however, the storeys in a building are counted in the same way. Thus, for example, the phrase "a seven-storey building" would mean the same thing in Britain and in the US—namely, a building with seven covered floors, including one at ground level and six at higher levels, even though the topmost of those levels would be called "6th floor" in Britain and "7th floor" in the US. Some count mezzanines as storeys while some do not.[3]

European scheme[edit]
In most of Europe, the "first storey" or "first floor" is the first level above ground level. This scheme is also used in many former British colonies, many Latin American countries (including Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Brazil)[citation needed], in Hawaii (when using Hawaiian language) and in many of the Commonwealth nations (including Malaysia, except Singapore and most of Canada).

This convention can be traced back to Medieval European usage. In countries that use this system, the floor at ground level is usually referred to by a special name, usually translating as "ground floor" or equivalent. For example, rez-de-chaussée (lit. "ground causeway") in France, Erdgeschoss ("ground floor") in Germany, piano terra (lit. "ground floor") in Italy, begane grond (lit. "walked-upon ground") in the Netherlands, planta baja or planta baixa ("bottom floor") in Spain, beheko solairua in Basque, andar térreo ("ground walkplace") in Brazil, rés-do-chão ("close to the ground") in Portugal, földszint ("ground level") in Hungary (although in Budapest the "fél szint" or "half floor" is an extra level between the ground and first floors, apparently the result of a tax evasion trick in the 19th century), parter (from French par terre, which means "on the ground") in Romania and Poland, prízemie ("by the ground") in Slovakia and pritlicje ("close to the ground") in Slovenia. In some countries that use this scheme, the higher floors may be explicitly qualified as being above the ground level, such as in Slovenian "prvo nadstropje" (literally "first upper floor").[citation needed]

In Spain, the level above ground level (the mezzanine) is sometimes called "entresuelo" (entresòl in Catalan, etc., which literally means "between-floors"), and elevators may skip it. The next level is sometimes called "principal". The "first floor" can therefore be three levels above ground level.[citation needed] In Italy, in the ancient palaces the first floor is called piano nobile ("noble floor"), since the noble owners of the palace lived there.

East Asian/North American scheme[edit]
The English-speaking parts of Canada generally follow the American convention, where the "first" floor is the floor at the ground level and the floor above it is the "second" floor. Canada however uses the spelling "storey", not "story". In Quebec, the European scheme was formerly used (as in France), but by now it has been mostly replaced by the US system, so that rez-de-chaussée and premier étage ("first stage") are now generally equivalent in Quebec. Mexico, on the other hand, uses the European system.

This system is also used in some (but not all) Latin American countries. So, for example, planta baja and primer piso ("first floor"), which are distinct in Spain and Mexico, are equivalent in Chile and Peru, and refer both to the ground-level floor (although primer piso is used mainly for indoor areas, while planta baja is also used for areas outside the building). In Russia and some countries former of Soviet Union, the upper floors are counted using US system, however the basements are counted differently. The first basement in UK and US is called "????????? ????" (literally "ground floor") in Russia. The second basement in UK and US is called "?????? ??????" (literally "first basement") in Russia.

Most parts of eastern Asia, including China (excluding Hong Kong), Korea, Japan, and Singapore, follow this system. In the grammar of the respective languages, the numbers precede the word "floor", and are cardinals rather than ordinals, so they would translate literally as "1 floor, 2 floor" (etc.), rather than "1st floor, 2nd floor", or "floor 1, floor 2".

In Vietnam, European scheme is used in the southern part of the country (most notably in the country's largest city, Ho Chi Minh City), but the American scheme is more prevalent in the northern and central regions (including in Hanoi, the capital). Cardinal numbers usually follow the word "floor" (i.e. floor 1, floor 2, or floor 3). The northern Vietnamese system is also used in Indonesia.

In Singapore, the British system of numbering originally prevailed, but this was replaced in the 1980s with the North American scheme to avoid confusion with the Chinese scheme. In order to emphasise the difference from the original scheme, reference is frequently made to storeys or levels rather than floors) - so the 3rd floor is the 4th storey (or storey 4) or 4th level (or level 4). Many buildings continue to label storeys or levels rather than floors. Some time later, some newer buildings began to use 'floors' instead of naming them as 'storeys' or 'levels'.

Similarly, in Hawaii, the Hawaiian language floor label uses British floor numbering, however the English language floor label uses American floor numbering. Formerly, the English floor label also uses British floor numbering (Ground floor, First floor, Second floor), which in Hawaiian is (Lepo papa, Papa akahi, Papa alua) respectively, but it was also replaced by North American scheme to make it the same as the rest of the US. To emphasize this difference, buildings in Hawaii uses Level rather than Floor. Thus, Lepo papa = Ground floor = Level 1, Papa akahi = First floor = Level 2, etc.

Idiosyncrasies[edit]

Unusual floor numbering that reads B (basement floor), LG (lower ground floor), G, (ground floor), UG (upper ground floor), 1 (first floor), L2 (lower 2nd floor) and 2 (second floor).

A large elevator panel in a North American high-rise omits several floors as well as designating three separate levels as penthouse floors.
Some American high-rise buildings follow the British/European system, often out of a desire on the part of the building's architect or owners.

An arrangement often found in high rise public housing blocks, particularly those built in the United Kingdom during the 1960s and 1970s, is that elevators would only call at half the total number of floors, or at an intermediate level between a pair of floors; thus a 24 story building would only have 12 apparent floors, a 30 storey building would have 15 apparent floors and so on. This was commonly used as a cost saving measure to reduce the number of elevators (or elevator stops) needed to service the building, therefore staircases would be used to access an "upper" and "lower" level from each intermediate landing.

Occasionally, buildings in the United States and Canada will have both a "1st floor" (usually the main floor of the building) and a "ground floor" below it. This typically happens when both floors have street-level entrances, as is often the case for hillside buildings. In the UK, the lower of these floors would be called the "lower ground floor", while the upper would be called either the "upper ground floor" or simply the "ground floor". Multi-storey car parks which have a staggered arrangement of parking levels sometimes use a convention where there may be an "upper" and "lower" level of the same floor number, (e.g.: "1U/U1" = Upper 1st, "L2/2L" = "Lower 2nd" and so on), although the elevators will typically only serve one of the two levels, or the elevator lobby for each floor pair may be between the two levels.

Sometimes, floor number 1 may be assigned to the lowest basement level; in that case the ground floor may be numbered 2 or higher. Sometimes two connected buildings (such as a store and its car park) have incongruent floor numberings, due to sloping terrain or different ceiling heights.

In Norway and Sweden, the floors are numbered as in the North American scheme ("1st" = "ground", "2nd", etc.), but one can also refer to them by how many flights of stairs one needs to climb to reach them from the ground floor. So, in Swedish 2:a våningen ("2nd floor") is the same as 1 trappa upp ("1 stair up"); 3:e våningen ("3rd floor") is also 2 trappor upp ("2 stairs up"); and so on. In modern lifts, however, floors are usually numbered according to British convention, where the street level is referred to E (for "entré", or entrance) or BV (for bottenvåning, or bottom floor) and the next floor is given the number 1.


An elevator control panel in an apartment building in Shanghai. Floors 4, 13 and 14 are missing.
In some instances, buildings may omit the thirteenth floor in their floor numbering because of common superstition surrounding this number. The floor numbering may either go straight from 12 to 14, or the floor may be given an alternative name such as "Skyline" or "14A".


Letter boxes of an old residential building in Hong Kong. The Chinese floor numbering uses the traditional Chinese system, the same as the North American one, while the English floor numbering uses the British system.
In Hong Kong, the British numbering system is now generally used, in English and Chinese alike. In some older residential buildings, however, the floors are identified by signs in Chinese characters that say "??" ("2 floor") at the floor just above ground, as in the North American system. For those buildings, the Chinese phrase "??" or its English equivalent "3rd floor" may refer either to the storey three levels above ground (as in the modern numbering), which is actually labelled "??" ("4 floor"), or to the storey with the sign "??" ("3 floor"), which is only two levels above ground. This confusing state of affairs has led, for example, to numerous errors in utility billing.[4] To avoid ambiguity, business forms often ask that storey numbers in address fields be written as accessed from a lift.

In some mainland Chinese and Taiwanese buildings (typically high-rises), the 4th floor is actually omitted or skipped, along with other floors ending in 4 such as the 14th and 24th floors, with the floor above the third numbered as the fifth and so on. This is due to the Chinese word for "four" being very phonetically similar (though not exact homonyms in most dialects due to their intonations) to the word for "dead" or "die". Also for this reason, apartments on the 4th floor in Asian countries such as Taiwan have traditionally been cheaper to rent. This cultural superstition can be considered a form of tetraphobia. It is also common in China for the 13th floor to also be omitted.